From the desk of
Rabbi Sholom Rosenfeld
Director
Boruch Hashem
23 Shvat, 5776 (2/02/16)
Shnas Hakhel
 
Dear Friends of Oholei Torah,
Normally we avoid discussing our yeshiva's internal affairs in public. But in the present situation we have no choice, as you will see.
Sixty years ago, Rabbi Michoel Teitelbaum ע"ה founded a tiny cheder school with the Rebbe's full backing. It is not widely known how dear Oholei Torah was to the Rebbe and how involved the Rebbe was in all its details. For several years the Rebbe paid every year's deficit, and throughout the years gave detailed advice and directives about the yeshiva's financial and educational affairs, particularly to ensure that its education remain exclusively al taharas hakodesh, on the purest possible level. When the new yeshiva needed a principal and administrator, the Rebbe directed Rabbi Yosef Rosenfeld - then a successful shaliach in California - to return here, telling him this was to be his shlichus. For over 55 years, Rabbi Rosenfeld has run the yeshiva's affairs with incredible devotion and an extraordinary sense of personal responsibility, carrying the yeshiva's (by now) multi-million dollar budget and payroll on his shoulders.
Both Reb Michoel and Rabbi Rosenfeld often turned to wealthy members of our community to support the Rebbe's yeshiva. In particular, Reb Dovid Deitch ע"ה and his family for many years were a mainstay of its support. At various points, prominent community members were asked to join committees, primarily to find funding for the yeshiva's running budget and for major construction and renovation projects, Never ever did they attempt to get involved in or mix into the internal affairs of running the Yeshiva let alone mix into educational matters.
Two years ago, Rabbi Rosenfeld broadened the existing committee to include several energetic young members. Well-meaning as they were, they sought ways to improve the yeshiva (for even the finest institution can be further improved). Rabbi Rosenfeld valued their advice and implemented some of their ideas.
At one point, however, instead of focusing on improving the financials they actually caused some unnecessary losses to Oholei Torah while they started overstepping the bounds of their prerogatives. Although none have any experience in education, they decided to assume the power to hire and fire faculty members, determining which are doing their job and which not, and attempted to institute changes in the yeshiva's educational and organizational structure without proper consultation with, or authorization by, the yeshiva's long-time administrator and its educational committees. They negotiated to install a new principal who, despite many qualifications, was unsuitable for a yeshiva al taharas hakodesh. Eventually, Rabbi Rosenfeld insisted on blocking this appointment, but the compensation agreement cost the yeshiva significant funds (at the insistence of this Vaad) that it can ill afford.
To resolve his issues with them, Rabbi Rosenfeld requested the Beth Din of Crown Heights to send these committee members a summons to a din Torah, which it did on 29th Sivan, 5775 (6/16/15) - over eight months ago. At his request, it also imposed on them a restraining order (ikul) not to take any steps affecting the yeshiva until a din Torah would resolve all disagreements. The summons, however, was ignored.
As the new school year approached, the Beth Din sent another summons, on 15th Ellul, 5775 (8/30/15), but again with no response. A third summons was sent on 5th Marcheshvan, 5776 (10/18/15), which was again ignored, and a week later, on 12th Marcheshvan (10/25/15), a letter "informing and warning" them that, since this is one of our community's major educational institutions, if they would not respond by Rosh Chodesh Kislev (11/12/15), the Beth Din would, even in their absence, issue Halachic rulings concerning all of Rabbi Rosenfeld's complaints. The committee members started resorting to all kinds of ruses to stall for time.
Meanwhile, a civil attorney, Mr. Snitow, Esq., representing those committee members, met with Rabbi Gavriel Stern, a Rabbinic lawyer representing Rabbi Rosenfeld, for two and a half hours on 9th Cheshvan (10/22/15). At the meeting he told Rabbi Stern clearly that the committee has no intention of participating in a din Torah but would resolve the issue through civil law only, using civil courts, etc.
Realizing that those committee members were already using civil lawyers and would likely do so all the way to civil court, Rabbi Rosenfeld had no choice but to consult with lawyers himself. On reviewing the relevant documents, his lawyers discovered that this committee had no legal standing whatsoever! Accordingly, his attorney sent members of the committee individual letters thanking them for their past help and informing them that their committee is now disbanded.
Some of the ex-committee members decided to get even. Rabbi Rosenfeld's office had commissioned the Charidy organization to hold a matching funds campaign for Oholei Torah, which was very successful and raised significant funds. Suddenly, Charidy received a letter from Mr. Snitow that those funds should not be deposited into Oholei Torah's accounts but into an account to be controlled by the ex-committee members! They even went to court to get an order directing Citibank not to let Rabbi Rosenfeld or his representatives use the yeshiva accounts!
Anyone who learns Chumash with Rashi knows what he writes at the beginning of Parashas Mishpotim: "...Whoever brings lawsuits involving Jews before non-Jewish [courts] desecrates [Hashem's] Name and honors the name of the false gods by giving them importance." The Rambam (end of Hilchos Sanhedrin) rules: "Whoever litigates according to the laws of the gentiles and in their courts, even if their laws are the same as the laws of the Jews, is wicked, and it is as if he curses and raises a hand against the Torah of Moshe, our teacher"!
Moreover, the Rebbe has often insisted that internal disagreements within or between Lubavitch institutions should be litigated exclusively by Lubavitcher Rabbonim. A well-known response of the Rebbe - publicized in his handwriting - states that using non-Chabad Rabbonim in such a case is "An utterly wild proposal. This is not a din Torah concerning business or the like, but an internal and painful matter relating to Lubavitch communal work. [Rabbonim who litigate such a matter] must be solely from among those: [a] who will not publicize this at all outside, [b] to whom the affairs of Lubavitch are precious, [c] who have been privileged to be Chassidim of my father-in-law, the Rebbe, founder of the [institution], in which case it is to be hoped that they will carefully consider what accords with the founder's desire."
Torah-observant Jews are expected to resolve their issues only before a beth din (in this case a "zabla" beth din,by which each side selects a Rav who ensures its concerns are adequately addressed, and the two sides' Rabbonim together agree on a third Rav), Instead, however, these individuals have brazenly insisted on going to civil court. Doing so without Rabbinic permission (which can be given only in specific special circumstances) betrays a deep lack of yiras Shomayim, seriously placing in question their sincerity and desire to gratify the Rebbe - surely essential qualities for those who would presume to make decisions concerning a yeshiva, especially one that is al taharas hakodesh. This, and the financial damage they are causing the yeshiva (besides potential damage from bringing the yeshiva's affairs into the public arena), automatically disqualifies them from any future involvement in issues of Torah education.
Accordingly, we ask all conscientious members of the community to whom the Rebbe's words are dear to pressure these individuals, who have desecrated Hashem's Name and raised their hand against the Torah, to agree immediately to settle all their issues at a din Torah before a properly constituted beth din of Lubavitcher Rabbonim, which will bring justice in accordance with our Torah. Otherwise, they are deliberately making war against the Rebbe's yeshiva, and against those whose appointment to head it the Rebbe fully approved.
May these individuals have mercy upon their neshomos and do what is right before they cause long-lasting damage to one of the Rebbe's pre-eminent institutions. "May Hashem bless His people with peace" - the peace of fulfilling the Torah properly.
Sincerely,
Rabbi Sholom Rosenfeld
Director
